VARANASI GHATS:-
The 85 Ghats of Banaras
1. Assi Ghat
Assi Ghat in Varanasi
Assi Ghat in Varanasi
Originally much larger, Assi Ghat traditionally marks the southern end of the traditional city, being the last of the major bathing ghats to retain its clay bank. In the 19th century, it was split into what is now Ganga Mahal, Rewan, Tulsi and Bhadaini ghats.

The Assi Ghat is a renowned spiritual site, with the Panchatirth and Haridwar pilgrimages requiring a pilgrimage there. Taking a holy bath in the Assi Ghat is considered to be deeply auspicious, as ancient texts have described the river that flows there as a tributary of the Ganga. Near the banks of the river lies an open-air temple beneath a pipal tree.

2. Ganga Mahal Ghat
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
The Ganga Mahal Ghat is named after the erstwhile palace of a maharaja of Banaras, situated at the northern edge of Assi Ghat, dating back to the early twentieth century.

3. Riva (Rewan) Ghat
Riva (Rewan) Ghat in Varanasi
Riva (Rewan) Ghat in Varanasi
Originally known as Lala Mishir Ghat, this site was named after a palace built by the family priest of King Ranjit of Punjab. In 1879, Maharaja Rivan acquired the palace and ghat, renaming them both to Riva. Today, the former palace is a hostel accommodating students studying music.

4. Tulsi Ghat
Tulsi Ghat in Varanasi
Tulsi Ghat in Varanasi
The renowned Tulsi Ghat is named after the illustrious poet Tulsidas (1547-1622 A.D.), who is renowned for authoring Ramcharitmanas, a translation of the Sanskrit epic Ramayana. Tulsidas established a monastery, Hanuman temple, and Askaha in the vicinity of the ghat. Initially, the ghat was referred to as Lolark Ghat, on account of the Lolark Kund that stands nearby.

5. Bhadaini Ghat
Bhadaini Ghat in Varanasi
Bhadaini Ghat in Varanasi
The iconic water tower of the sprawling pumping station serves as a landmark for the city. It is the main supplier of water to the entire locale, and its purpose is strictly utilitarian in nature.

6. Janaki Ghat
Janaki Ghat in Varanasi
Janaki Ghat in Varanasi
Originally referred to as Nagamber Ghat, the existing ghat was constructed in 1870 by Maharani Kunwar of Sursand (in Bihar). Janaki is an alternative name for Sita, the wife of Ram.

7. Anandamayi (Mata Anandami) Ghat
Anandamayi (Mata Anandami) Ghat in Varanasi
Anandamayi (Mata Anandami) Ghat in Varanasi
Anandamayi is a name derived from the Sanskrit term for ‘bliss permeated’, and is famously attributed to the woman saint who founded an ashram for girls in 1944. Previously known as Imalia Ghat, the ghat was bought from the British by Anandamayi and was renowned for her capacity to heal a variety of physical and mental ailments.

8. Vachcharaj Ghat
Vachcharaj Ghat in Varanasi
Vachcharaj Ghat in Varanasi
Vachcharaj Ghat, constructed in the late 18th century, is named after a Jain banker who significantly contributed to the establishment of Banaras as a hub of commerce. This ghat is also said to be the birthplace of Suparshvanath, the seventh Tirthankara, and it is now a residential area for much of the Jain population of the city.

9. Jain Ghat
Jain Ghat in Varanasi
Jain Ghat in Varanasi
Originally, Vachcharaj Ghat included this area, but it was declared its own Ghat in 1931. The southern end is principally utilized for bathing, while the northern end is populated by members of the Mallaha (boatman) community.

10. Nishadraj (Nishad) Ghat
Nishadraj (Nishad) Ghat in Varanasi
Nishadraj (Nishad) Ghat in Varanasi
Originally, this Ghat formed part of the Prabhu Ghat situated to the north, until it was divided in the beginning of the 20th century. The Ghat is named after the legendary leader of the boatmen who assisted Rama, Sita and Lakshmana during their crossing of the Sarayu River, as narrated in the Ramayana. Today, a significant number of fishermen and boatmen may be found here.

11. Prabhu Ghat
Prabhu Ghat in Varanasi
Prabhu Ghat in Varanasi
Prabhu Ghat, constructed in the early 20th century, was named after Maharaja Prabhu Narayan Singh who reigned over Banaras in the period 1889-1931. This area is well-known for its laundry service and is also inhabited by numerous boatmen families.

12. Panchkota Ghat
Panchkota Ghat in Varanasi
Panchkota Ghat in Varanasi
In the late 19th century, the King of Panchakola (Bengal) erected the Panchkota Ghat, with a series of slender staircases leading to a palatial edifice which houses two temples.

13. Chet Singh Ghat
Chet Singh Ghat in Varanasi
Chet Singh Ghat in Varanasi
The grand palace of Maharaja Chet Singh, the illegitimate son of the first Maharaja of Banaras, Balwant Singh, looms over this ghat. Chet Singh was able to gain the throne by outmaneuvering Mahip Narayan Singh and providing a bribe to the Nawab of Awadh.

In 1781, the transition of power from Chet Singh to Governor General Warren Hastings resulted in a fierce battle here. With the conflict raging outside the palace, Chet Singh made his escape by scaling a window and using a makeshift rope of unraveled turbans to lower himself down to the ghat below.

14. Niranjani Ghat
Niranjani Ghat in Varanasi
Niranjani Ghat in Varanasi
In 1897, an Niranjani Akhara was founded on the site previously occupied by Chet Singh Ghat, a holy site located along the banks of the River Ganges near Varanasi, India. It was established to provide shelter and spiritual guidance to pilgrims who visited the site for spiritual healing and renewal. The Akhara soon became a place of refuge for many of the local villagers as well, who sought respite from the oppressive conditions of their everyday lives.

Over time, the Akhara has become an important place of worship and pilgrimage, with thousands of devotees coming each year to offer prayers and receive blessings from the Akhara’s many religious leaders. As the years have gone by, the Akh

15. Maha Nirvani Ghat
Maha Nirvani Ghat in Varanasi
Maha Nirvani Ghat in Varanasi
This Ghat, believed to have been the location where Lord Buddha took a bath, was the residence of Acharya Kapil Muni of Sankhya philosophy fame in the 7th century A.D., and is named in honor of the Mahanirvani sect of Naga Saints. It is also noteworthy that the former home of Mother Teresa is located nearby.

16. Shivala Ghat
Shivala Ghat in Varanasi
Shivala Ghat in Varanasi
The area around Shivala, meaning ‘abode of Shiva’, is dominated by a colossal building constructed by Nepali King Sanjay Vikram Shah. The area is also home to a Shiva temple overlooking the ghat and a large South Indian community that has inhabited Banaras for the past two centuries for both business and religious purposes.

17. Gularia Ghat
Gularia Ghat in Varanasi
Gularia Ghat in Varanasi
This Ghat, one of the smallest along the mighty Ganges, was named after a large Gular tree that once grew in this area. Local legend has it that the tree was planted by a hermit who had taken up residence in the area many years ago. It is said that he meditated beneath the Gular tree for hours on end, and was an important part of the community. After his death, the locals began to refer to the area as the Gular Ghat in honour of the hermit. Today, the Gular Ghat is a popular destination for tourists who flock to the area to admire its beauty and serenity.

18. Dandi Ghat
Dandi Ghat in Varanasi
Dandi Ghat in Varanasi
The Lalooji Agarwal-renovated ghat is a stunning piece of architecture that stands out among the many ghats in the region. It is named after the Dandi ascetics, who are noted for their signature staffs. The ascetics are said to have been living in the area since the 12th century and were known for their discipline and devotion to their faith.

The monastery they built in close proximity to the ghat is a beautiful sight and is a testament to their dedication. Inside the monastery, one can find centuries-old scriptures and artifacts that pay homage to the ascetics’ faith. The monastery also serves as a place of contemplation and spiritual renewal for those who visit. The Dandi ascetics have

19. Hanuman Ghat
Hanuman Ghat in Varanasi
Hanuman Ghat in Varanasi
Previously known as Ramesvaram Ghat, Hanuman Ghat was given its current name due to the temple erected here in the 18th century by the renowned poet Tulsidas. This ghat is further distinguished by the temple of Ruru, the canine incarnation of Bhairav.

20. Prachina (Old Hanuman) Ghat
Prachina (Old Hanuman) Ghat in Varanasi
Prachina (Old Hanuman) Ghat in Varanasi
This Ghat is renowned as the birthplace of saint Vallabha (1479-1531 A.D.), who developed a philosophy that sparked a revival of Krishna bhakti. The temple of Rama is composed of five Shiva Lingams named after Rama (Ramesvara), his two brothers (Laksmansevara and Bharatsvarar), and his wife (Sitesv).

21. Karnataka State Ghat
Karnataka State Ghat in Varanasi
Karnataka State Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed in 1910 by the then-southern State of Mysore (now Karnataka), the Juna Order of Ascetics have a monastery and akhara located at this site. The Government of Karnataka operates a guesthouse here, which is open to all, though mainly used by visitors from Karnataka.

22. Harishchandra Ghat
Harishchandra Ghat in Varanasi
Harishchandra Ghat in Varanasi
Adi Manikarnika, alternatively referred to, is reckoned to be one of the oldest and two cremation ghats of the city. It is believed to be named after the legendary King who once was known to have worked in the cremation grounds in Kashi.

In 1987, an electric crematorium was introduced in this area, yet the majority of cremations continue to be carried out using traditional wooden pyres. In 1740, the religious guru Narayana Diksit renovated the ghat.

23. Lali Ghat
Lali Ghat in Varanasi
Lali Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed in 1778 by the ruler of Banaras, Manikarnika Ghat is a small but important ghat on the Ganges River. It is believed to be the site of Lord Shiva’s earring and is believed to be the gateway to the afterlife. Presided over by laundry workers, the ghat is the site of cremations, rituals and other sacred activities, and is an integral part of the culture of Banaras. Many devotees come here to take a dip in the holy waters as a sign of respect and as a way to cleanse their souls. It is said that even a single drop of water from the ghat has the power to grant freedom from the cycle of reincarnation.

24. Vijayanagaram Ghat
Vijayanagaram Ghat in Varanasi
Vijayanagaram Ghat in Varanasi
In 1890, the Vijayanagaram State of South India undertook a renovation of the ghat, which is now watched over by the Svami Karapatri Asrama and features shrines to Nilakantha and Nispapesvara.

25. Kedar Ghat
Kedar Ghat in Varanasi
Kedar Ghat in Varanasi
Kedar Ghat has a prominent portrayal in the Kedara Khanda of the Skanda Purana and is renowned for the Kedareshvara Linga, one of the fourteen lingas of considerable importance, as acknowledged by ancient scripture.

The ancient temple of Kedar is situated in the Himalayas along the banks of the Ganges, as described in Puranic texts. It is said that Lord Shiva originally established the linga there before constructing the temple at Kashi. Some experts believe that the Kedar temple may have been in existence even before the Vishwanath Temple.

During the late 16th century, Kumarasvami, a devotee of Dattatreya, established a monastery connected to the Kedaresvar temple. An inscription from the Gahadavala period, dated around 1100 A.D., made reference to a Svapnesvara Ghat nearby; unfortunately the exact location of this is currently unknown.

26. Chauki (Coawki) Ghat
Chauki (Coawki) Ghat in Varanasi
Chauki (Coawki) Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed in 1790, popularly referred to as the Buddhist Ghat, this site is renowned for its monumental pipala (ficus religiosa) tree situated at the summit of the stairs beneath which lies an array of stone nagas.

In proximity to the tree is the Rukmangesvara shrine, with the Naga Kupa (or “Snake Well”) situated a short distance away. The presence of a washermen community residing near the ghat has resulted in the platforms, iron-railings, and embankments being utilized for drying clothes.

27. Ksemesvara (Somesvara) Ghat
Ksemesvara (Somesvara) Ghat in Varanasi
Ksemesvara (Somesvara) Ghat in Varanasi
Previously referred to as Nala Ghat, the ghat existing today was constructed in the early 18th century. In 1962, devotees of Kumarasvami constructed a monastery here, and simultaneously established shrines of Kesemesvara and Ksemaka Gana. Presently, the neighbourhood is mainly inhabited by Bengali residents.

28. Manasarovara Ghat
Manasarovar Ghat in Varanasi
Manasarovara Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, which was originally constructed by Raja Man Singh of Amber in 1585, and restored in 1805, is named in reference to the hallowed Manasarovar Lake in Tibet.

29. Narada Ghat
Narada Ghat in Varanasi
Narada Ghat in Varanasi
Originally known as Kuvai Ghat, Narada Ghat is named after the renowned sage Narada, who is typically portrayed carrying the one-stringed Ektara instrument. It was built by Dattatreya Svami, the abbot of a monastery, in the year 1788.

30. Raja Ghat
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, formerly known as Amrita Rao Ghat, was constructed by Maratha chief Gajirao Balaji in 1720. It was gradually reconstructed with stone slabs between 1780 and 1807. Even today, it continues to be part of the Amritrao Peshwa Annapurna Trust.

31. Khori Ghat
Khori Ghat in Varanasi
Khori Ghat in Varanasi
Situated in the city of Varanasi, this Ghat was refurbished in the late 19th century by Kavindra Narayana Singh and is popularly referred to as Ganga Mahala Ghat. Boasting five temples overlooking the majestic Ganga river, it is a landmark of the city.

32. Pande (Pandey) Ghat
Pandey Ghat in Varanasi
Pandey Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, which was christened after the renowned wrestler from Varanasi, Babua Pande, was built atop the steps here by him and his akhara.

33. Sarvesvara Ghat
Sarvesvara Ghat in Varanasi
Sarvesvara Ghat in Varanasi
The construction of this small ghat was commissioned by Mathura Pandey in the late eighteenth century.

34. Digpatia Ghat
Digpatia Ghat in Varanasi
Digpatia Ghat in Varanasi
The stately palace, now known as Kashi Ashram, situated at the front of this ghat, was commissioned in 1830 by the king of Digpatia in Bengal.

35. Chausatti Ghat
Chausatti Ghat in Varanasi
Chausatti Ghat in Varanasi
The ghat, named for the temple of 64 goddesses which overlooks it, was the residence of renowned Sanskrit scholar Madhusudana Sarsvati (1540-1623). The temple was later restored by the King of Udaipur (Rajasthan), circa 1670.

36. Rana Mahal Ghat
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
As part of the northern addition to Chausathi Ghat, Rana Mahal Ghat was constructed by the King of Udaipur (Rajasthan) in 1670. Atop the ghat stands a temple devoted to the deity Vakratunda Vinayaka.

37. Darbhanga Ghat
Darbhanga Ghat in Varanasi
Darbhanga Ghat in Varanasi
The Darbhanga Palace, an impressive edifice constructed by the King of Darbhanga (Bihar) in 1915, looms over this ghat, accompanied by a nearby Shiva temple. At the summit is a shrine dedicated to Kukutesvara.

38. Munsi Ghat
Munshi Ghat varanasi in Varanasi
Munshi Ghat varanasi in Varanasi
In 1912, Sridhar Narayan Munsi, the finance minister of Nagpur, constructed Munsi Ghat. This extension of Darbhanga Ghat was named in his honour after his demise in 1924.

39. Ahilyabai Ghat
Ahilyabai Ghat in Varanasi
Ahilyabai Ghat in Varanasi
The Kevelyagiri Ghat underwent substantial renovations in 1778 under the patronage of Indore’s Queen Ahilyabai Holkar. Her commitment to developing religious infrastructure in Banaras was evidenced by the construction of the Amethy Temple on Manikarnika Ghat and the renowned Vishwanath Temple. As a result of her contributions, this ghat was formally renamed in her honour.

40. Sitala Ghat
Sitala Ghat in Varanasi
Sitala Ghat in Varanasi
In 1740, the renowned Narayana Diksit refurbished Sitala Ghat, which is a northern extension of Dashashwamdh Ghat and is named after the iconic Sitala Temple located there.

41. Dashashwamedh Ghat
Dashashwamedh Ghat in Varanasi
Dashashwamedh Ghat in Varanasi
Positioned in the center of the series of ghats located along the Ganges River, Dashashwamdh Ghat is widely noted as the most active of all the ghats and is commonly referred to by visitors as “the primary ghat”.

It is said that at the site of Divodasa, Lord Brahma conducted a ritual of ten-horse sacrifice (dasa-asvamedha). During the day, priests provide different ceremonies and rites for pilgrims, and in the evening, a daily aarti ritual is conducted.

This ghat holds a great deal of historical significance for its connection to various pilgrimage routes. In the 18th century, the southern part of the ghat was refurbished by Balaji Bajirao Peshwa in 1740, with additional modifications being made by Ahilyabai Holkar of lndore in 1774.

42. Prayag Ghat
Prayag Ghat in Varanasi
Prayag Ghat in Varanasi
The Dashashwamdh Ghat separates Allahabad, another renowned holy city, from Banaras, located 80 miles to the west. At the confluence of the Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswati rivers, it is a significant pilgrimage site.

It is widely accepted that the performance of rituals and bathing in this sacred area provide the same spiritual benefit as at Prayaga. The ghat was refurbished by the Queen of Digpatia State in the 19th century.

43. Rajendra Prasad Ghat
Rajendra Prasad Ghat in Varanasi
Rajendra Prasad Ghat in Varanasi
[ Still considered an extension of Dashashwamdh Ghat, it was once known as Ghoda Ghat (Horse Ghat) due to a stone statue of a horse that once stood here recognising the ten horse sacrifice.

In the latter part of the 19th century, the statue was relocated to the Sankatmochana temple. To honour the first President of India, who had been in office from 1950 to 1962, the ghat was renamed in 1979.

44. Man Mandir Ghat
Man Mandir Ghat in Varanasi
Man Mandir Ghat in Varanasi
The Somesvara Ghat was rechristened to the Man Mandir Palace in 1585, when the Rajput king of Amber, Man Singh, constructed his palace, featuring an astronomical observatory atop its roof.

45. Tripurabhairavi Ghat
Tripurabhairavi Ghat in Varanasi
Tripurabhairavi Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat is named in honour of the Tripura Bhairavi Shrine, a female consort of Tripuresvara whose effigy is also situated there. In the late 18th century, it was restored by the King of Banaras.

46. Mira Ghat
Mira Ghat in Varanasi
Mira Ghat in Varanasi
In 1735, Mira Rustam Ali, a celebrated tax collector in the city, converted the two ancient sites of Jarasandhesvara and Vrdhaditya into the existing ghat. He actively took part in the customary festivities of Banaras and is still remembered in certain regional folk songs during festivities such as Holi or Chaiti.

The Dharmesa temple is closely linked to the myth of Yama, the Lord of Death, who is believed to preside over the fate of the dead worldwide, with the exception of Kashi. In 1956, Svami Karapatri-Ji, a local Brahmin, established a new Vishwanath Temple in the area in order to serve the needs of the lower caste community.

47. Phuta (Naya) Ghat
Phuta (Naya) Ghat in Varanasi
Phuta (Naya) Ghat in Varanasi
Previously referred to as Yajnesvara Ghat, Phuta has been coined to mean “broken”, though the reason for its re-naming is unclear. In the mid 19th century, Svami Mahesvarananda undertook a renovation of the site.

48. Nepali Ghat
Nepali Ghat in Varanasi
Nepali Ghat in Varanasi
The Gorkha dynasty constructed the iconic Nepalese Temple in 1902, creating a distinct Nepalese-dominated atmosphere. E.B. Havell observed the ghat in 1841.

Nestled within a stone embankment, and becoming entirely inundated by the Ganges during the monsoon season, is a picturesque sanctuary devoted to Ganga, the goddess of the river, which is symbolized by a female figure perched atop a crocodile.

A staircase leads to the Nepalese temple, a picturesque building partially obscured by majestic tamarind and pippal trees. Constructed mostly from wood and bricks, its double-storied roof with large overhanging eaves upheld by brackets is a noteworthy feature of Nepalese architecture.

49. Lalita Ghat
Lalita Ghat in Varanasi
Lalita Ghat in Varanasi
The city is renowned for its two iconic shrines, one dedicated to Vishnu known as Ganga Kashev, and the other to Ganga, referred to as Bhagirathi Devi. Additionally, a shrine of Lalita Devi is located in the area, and it is believed that seeing her grants the same merits as circumambulating the entire world.

50. Bauli Ghat
Bauli Ghat in Varanasi
Bauli Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, previously known as Raja Rajesvari Ghat and currently referred to as Umaragiri and Amroha Ghat, is believed to have been constructed during the early 19th century by Babu Kasheva Deva, a wealthy merchant from Banaras.

51. Jalashayi Ghat
Jalashayi Ghat in Varanasi
Jalashayi Ghat in Varanasi
Jalashayi, a ritual involving the immersion of a deceased individual in water prior to their cremation, indicates that this ghat was perhaps previously used for this purpose prior to the cremation occurring at Manikarnika Ghat. The ghat and its associated structures, therefore, likely have a deep historical significance.

52. Khirki Ghat
Khirki Ghat in Varanasi
Khirki Ghat in Varanasi
The term “Khirki” translates to “windows”, which may suggest that it was a place from which the cremations taking place at Manikarnika Ghat could be observed by mourners and attendants. Five sati shrines are extant here, in addition to a pilgrim rest house built in 1940 by Baldeo Dasa Birla.

53. Manikarnika Ghat
Manikarnika Ghat in Varanasi
Manikarnika Ghat in Varanasi
Situated in Varanasi, Manikarnika Ghat is renowned for its association with cremations, dating back thousands of years. Notably, it was the first ghat to be renovated in stone, with epigraphic references from the Gupta period beginning in the 4th century A.D. For further information, please refer to my separate blog post.

54. Bajirao Ghat
Bajirao Ghat in Varanasi
Bajirao Ghat in Varanasi
In 1735, Bajirao Pesava was the architect of this ghat and the adjacent palace. Nearby is the highly popular and widely photographed Ratneshwar Mahadev Temple, a staple in the city of Banaras.

The region has been plagued by landslides over the centuries, necessitating repeat repairs and reconstructions by Queen Baijabai of Gwalior in the 1830s. This ghat was formerly known as Dattatreya Ghat in reference to the nearby Dattatreyesvara temple.

55. Scindia Ghat
Scindia Ghat in Varanasi
Scindia Ghat in Varanasi
Formerly known as Viresvara Ghat, named after the temple located in the vicinity of the Ganges, the ghat was constructed by Ahilabai Holker of Indore in 1780. Over the following years, the site has been subject to a number of refurbishments and remodelings, including those performed by Queen Baijabai in 1829 and Daulatarao Scindhia in 1937.

56. Sankata Ghat
Sankata Ghat in Varanasi
Sankata Ghat in Varanasi
Originally known as Yameshvara Ghat, Sankaha Ghat was built by the King of Baroda (Gujarat) in the late 18th century. Subsequently, in 1825, Beniram Pandit’s widow, affectionately known as “Panditain,” and her nephews renovated the ghat and constructed a temple of Sankata Devi.

57. Ganga Mahal Ghat – 2
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
Ganga Mahal Ghat in Varanasi
The second Ghats of the same name in Varanasi, an exquisite palace, houses a temple dedicated to Krishna and Radha, built in 1865 by Queen Tarabai Raje Shinde, a Scindhia ruler from Gwalior. Originally constructed in the early 19th century by a monarch of Gwalior, this Ghats was later refurbished by…

58. Bhonsale Ghat
Bhonsale Ghat in Varanasi
Bhonsale Ghat in Varanasi
The Bhonsale Palace, constructed by the Maratha rulers of Nagpur in the late eighteenth century, stands prominently as one of the most stunning edifices to adorn the banks of the Ganga in Banaras. This stately palace reflects a remarkable blend of elegance and power, its captivating grandeur rising from the ghat to an impressive height.

This palace appears to be inspired by Chet Singh Palace to the south, with its roof housing two grand temples dedicated to Shiva and Vishnu. Close to the palace are venerated shrines of Yamesvara and Yamaditya.

59. Naya Ghat
Naya Ghat in Varanasi
Naya Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed by Maratha ruler Peshwa Amrit Rao, this ghat was dedicated to Lord Ganesha. “Naya” translates to ‘new’, and it served as one of the primary quays of the city. According to Prinsep’s map of 1822, this ghat was referred to as Gularia Ghat. In 1960, it underwent some repairs.

60. Ganesha Ghat
Ganesha Ghat in Varanasi
Ganesha Ghat in Varanasi
Agisvara Ghat, now known as Naya Ghat, underwent a period of renovation between 1761 and 1772, initiated by Madhorao Pesava. This ghat is renowned for its temple dedicated to the deity Ganesha.

61. Mehta Ghat
Mehta Ghat in Varanasi
Mehta Ghat in Varanasi
Established in 1962, Metha Ghat is an extension of Naya and Ganesha Ghat and is derived from the name of the nearby V.S. Mehta hospital.

62. Ram Ghat
Ram Ghat in Varanasi
Ram Ghat in Varanasi
The Ram Ghat is a renowned bathing area renowned for its proximity to the small Ram temple and the illustrious Sanga Veda School.

63. Jatara Ghat
Jatara Ghat in Varanasi
Jatara Ghat in Varanasi
In 1766, Madhorao Pesava undertook a revamping of the ghats along the Ganga and among the improvements made was the construction of the Jatara Ghat.

64. Raja Gwalior Ghat
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
Madhorao Pesava also constructed Jatara and Raja Gwalior Ghat in 1766, and despite lacking any distinct architectural separation, the two are often considered a single entity.

65. Mangala Gauri (Bala or Lakshmanbala) Ghat
Mangala Gauri (Bala or Lakshmanbala) Ghat in Varanasi
Mangala Gauri (Bala or Lakshmanbala) Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed by Bajirao Peshwa in 1735, the ghat underwent a renovation by Lakmana Bala of Gwalior in 1807 which has caused a variety of different names for the ghat. Situated above the ghat is a dilapidated temple which originally belonged to the Mathara Peshwas and was later transferred to the Schindia rulers of G.

66. Venu Madhava (Bindu Madhava) Ghat
Venu Madhava Ghat in Varanasi
Venu Madhava Ghat in Varanasi
Widely seen as the lower end of Panchganga Ghat, Venimadhava Ghat takes its moniker from the temple on the premises, which may have its origins in the 10th century. By 1496, the Bindu Madhava temple had been reduced to rubble, though it was reconstructed by the Maharaja of Amber in 1585.

Aurangzeb subsequently demolished the temple and constructed the Alamgir Mosque on its ruined foundations. Bindu Madhava was then re-erected a short distance away from the mosque.

67. Panchganga Ghat
Panchganga Ghat in Varanasi
Panchganga Ghat, located in the holy city of Banaras, is thought to be the convergence of five rivers/streams: the Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvati, Kirana, and Dhupapapa – though only the mighty Ganga remains visible today.

The stone ghat was initially constructed by Raghunatha Tandan, the Finance Secretary of Mughal King Akbar, and was later renovated by Bajirao Pesava in 1735, followed by Sripatirao Pesava in 1775.

A multitude of three-sided shrines and cubicles facing the Ganges River offer spaces for yogis and meditators. Some of these compartments contain a linga or image, while others are vacant. In the mid-1850s, Matthew Atmore Sherring conducted research in Varanasi and described these cubicles.

The ghat is expansive and deep, with a remarkable degree of fortitude. Its steps and towers are entirely constructed of stone and, due to the sheer quantity of them, can accommodate a large number of devotees and bathers. The towers are low and hollow, and are utilized as places of worship and sanctuaries. Each one is home to several godlike figures.

An uninformed onlooker would be unaware of the presence of idols, and perhaps not consider that the pathway was atop a sequence of sacred sites, and over a multitude of deities. To comprehend the offense taking place, one would need to descend a few steps.

68. Durga Ghat
Durga Ghat in Varanasi
Durga Ghat in Varanasi
Prior to his demise in the mid-18th century, Narayana Diksit, a guru of the Pesavas, acquired land from local fishermen and constructed two ghats: Durga Ghat and Brahma Ghat.
Prior to 1800, Nana Phadanavisa, also known as Nana Fadnavis, undertook renovations and constructed an impressive mansion with a view of the ghat referred to as Phadanavisa Wada. Nana Phadanavisa served as Prime Minister of Pune, and is credited with a number of construction projects, particularly the substantial alterations made to Loha.

69. Brahma Ghat
Brahma Ghat in Varanasi
Brahma Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed simultaneously with Durga Ghat to the south, the Kasi Matha Sansthana monastery is situated atop the ghat.

70. Bundi Parakota Ghat
Bundi Parakota Ghat in Varanasi
Bundi Parakota Ghat in Varanasi
Originally referred to as Raja Mandira Ghat, this ghat was constructed in 1580 by Bundi’s King, Raja Surajana Hada. It has since gained fame for its impressive, large-scale murals applied to the walls, offering captivating sight from a distance.

71. Shitala Ghat
Shitala Ghat in Varanasi
Shitala Ghat in Varanasi
Continuing on from Bundi Parakota Ghat, Raja Surajana Hada constructed this ghat in 1580. It was named after the deity of smallpox, whose primary temple can be found at Dashashwamedh Ghat.

72. Lala Ghat
Lala Ghat in Varanasi
Lala Ghat in Varanasi
In the early 1800s, Lala Ghat was constructed by a wealthy merchant from Banaras and later named in his honour. In 1935, Baldeo Das Birla built a small sub-ghat, referred to as Gopi Givinda Ghat, and also erected a rest house for pilgrims.

73. Hanuman Garhi Ghat
Hanuman Garhi Ghat in Varanasi
Hanuman Garhi Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, located in Ayodya – the birthplace of Lord Rama, and representing the renowned Hanumangarhi site, is thought to have been established in the late 19th century. Here, visitors can find a wrestling arena (Ganga Akhara) and a memorial stone erected in honour of a Sati.

74. Gai (Gaya) Ghat
Gaighat in Varanasi
Gaighat in Varanasi
During the 12th century, Gai Ghat was seen as the southern border of Banaras, with the origin of Kashi beginning further north at Rajghat, where archaeological ruins can still be seen today. In the early 19th century, Balabai Shitole of Gwalior renovated Gai Ghat.

75. Badri Narayan Ghat
Badri Narayan Ghat in Varanasi
Badri Narayan Ghat in Varanasi
The ghat formerly referred to as Mahatha/Matha ghat was renovated by Balabai of Gwalior in the early 19th century and has since been renamed after the temple of Badri Narayan in the Himalayas.

76. Trilochan Ghat
Trilochan Ghat in Varanasi
Trilochan Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, named after the Trilochan Temple, dedicated to the three-eyed Shiva, was a renowned venue for ceremonies and bathing during the 12th century Gahadavala rule. Prior to 1750, it was refurbished by Narayana Dixsit, and again in 1795 by Nathu Bala of Pune (Maharastra).

77. Gola Ghat
Gola Ghat in Varanasi
Gola Ghat in Varanasi
Gola Ghat is a historic ferry point that dates back to the 12th century, and derives its name from the numerous granaries that were situated here. Its significance decreased significantly after the building of the Malviya Bridge in 1887.

78. Nandikeshvara (Nandu) Ghat
Nandikeshvara Ghat in Varanasi
Nandikeshvara Ghat in Varanasi
Constructed in the early 1900s by inhabitants of the surrounding area, an Akhara bearing the same name is also present here.

79. Sakka Ghat
Sakka Ghat in Varanasi
Sakka Ghat in Varanasi
The ghat, which was first recorded in the late 18th century, is primarily inhabited by washermen.

80. Telianala Ghat
Telianala Ghat in Varanasi
Telianala Ghat in Varanasi
This ghat, first attested in the late 18th century, has gained notoriety for Hiranyagarbha, an ancient sacred location. It bears the name of the Teli caste, who established themselves here centuries ago, due to their oil pressing tradition.

81. Naya (Phuta) Ghat
Phuta (Naya) Ghat in Varanasi
Phuta (Naya) Ghat in Varanasi
Originally known as Phuta Ghat and a place of reverence in the past, the area was abandoned in the 18th century before being renamed after subsequent renovations. Narsingh Jaipala Chainput-Bhabhua of Bihar undertook additional renovations in 1940.

82. Prahlad Ghat
Prahlad Ghat in Varanasi
Prahlad Ghat in Varanasi
Commemorating Prahlad, a renowned figure in ancient literature renowned for his piousness to Vishnu, references to the said ghat can be traced to Ghadavala inscriptions from the 12th century. Notably, the ghat was significantly larger before it was split in 1937 with the erection of the Nisada Ghat in the centre.

This region is home to a number of shrines, including Prahaladesvara, Prahalada Kesava, Vidara Narsimha, and Varada and Picindala Vinayakas to the south and Mahisasura Tirtha, Svaralingesvara, Yajna Varaha and Sivaduti Devi to the north.

83. Rani Ghat
Rani Ghat in Varanasi
Rani Ghat in Varanasi
Rani Ghat holds no religious importance and is one of the least popular ghats in Banaras. In 1937 Muniya Sahiba, a queen of Lucknow, built a grand house on the ghat and gradually people started calling it Rani Ghat.

In 1988, the government underwent a major refurbishment of Rani Ghat, which has since seen a steady rise in popularity. This location recently gained considerable media attention when Bollywood actor Sanjay Dutt conducted the last rites of his father, the veteran actor Sunil Dutt, here.

84. Raja Ghat
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
Raja Ghat in Varanasi
Prior to the inauguration of the Malviya Bridge in 1887, Raja Ghat was the most well-known and busiest ferry ghat in Varanasi. Records from the 11th century Gahadava inscriptions refer to the Raja Ghat area, although the region has a history that stretches back much further.

Visitors can still explore the archaeological traces of the original Kashi, believed to have been built along the banks of the Ganga, situated past the Malviya Bridge, which was named after the founder of the Banaras Hindu University.

85. Adi Keshava Ghat
Adi Keshav Ghat in Varanasi
Adi Keshav Ghat in Varanasi
At Vedesvara Ghat, which is thought to be the original home of Lord Vishnu and a popular pilgrimage site for the Gahadavala kings, visitors can experience a more rustic atmosphere. To learn more about this ghat, please refer to my blog post.



VARANASI FORTS:-
1. Ramnagar Fort:-
Ramnagar Fort, situated on the eastern bank of the Ganges, is one of the most well-known forts in Varanasi. Built in the 18th century by Kashi Naresh Maharaja Balwant Singh, the fort showcases Mughal-style architecture with intricate stone carvings and arched balconies. Today, the fort houses a museum that displays vintage cars, weapons, and royal artefacts. Visitors can explore the palace rooms adorned with ancient paintings and relics. The sunset view from the fort overlooking the Ganges is a sight to behold.
Timings: 10 AM – 5 PM
Location: Ramnagar, across the river from the main city
Tip: Visit during Dussehra for a grand celebration that takes place within the fort.

2. Chunar Fort
A stunning view from Chunar Fort, one of the prominent forts in Varanasi
Photo: Rangan Datta Wiki / Wikimedia Commons
Chunar Fort, located around 30 km from Varanasi, has a fascinating history that dates back over a thousand years. The fort has seen the rule of several dynasties, including the Mughals, Afghans, and the British. It’s known for its massive walls and secret tunnels. Visitors can explore the ancient prison cells and a small museum that showcases artefacts from different eras. The serene setting, surrounded by hills and overlooking the Ganges, makes Chunar Fort an ideal destination for history lovers and photographers.
Timings: 9 AM – 6 PM
Location: Chunar, Mirzapur District
Tip: Plan a guided tour to learn about the fort’s legends and haunted stories

3. Singh Dwar Fort
The architectural entrance of Singh Dwar Fort, a hidden gem among the forts in Varanasi
Photo: Ms Sarah Welch / Wikimedia Commons / Image For Representation Only
Singh Dwar Fort, though smaller in comparison to Ramnagar or Chunar, is rich in history. Located near the famous Kashi Vishwanath Temple, it has an impressive gateway adorned with lion carvings, symbolising strength. This fort, believed to be built during the reign of the Marathas, served as a military outpost. The fort offers a quiet place to relax and provides a glimpse into the strategic significance of forts in Varanasi. The surrounding lanes are filled with local shops, adding to the charm of this hidden fort.
Timings: 8 AM – 4 PM
Location: Close to the Kashi Vishwanath Temple
Tip: Combine your visit with a trip to the nearby temples for a complete cultural experience.

4. Vindhyachal Fort
A tranquil moment captured at one of the forts in Varanasi for travellers
Photo: Sujay25 / Wikimedia Commons
Vindhyachal Fort lies a little further away from Varanasi, in the scenic town of Vindhyachal. This fort is known for its religious significance, as it is close to the Vindhyavasini Temple, a famous Shakti Peetha. The fort’s ruins still retain their old-world charm, and the view from the top offers a peaceful escape from the bustling streets of Varanasi. Many pilgrims visit the fort as part of their journey to the temple. It’s an ideal place for those looking to combine history with spirituality.
Timings: 7 AM – 6 PM
Location: Vindhyachal, Mirzapur District
Tip: Visit during the Navratri festival for a vibrant atmosphere

5. Jaunpur Fort
The grand architecture of Jaunpur Fort, not far from the forts in Varanasi
Photo: Rangan Datta Wiki / Wikimedia Commons
Jaunpur Fort, though not within Varanasi, is an ideal destination for a day trip. Built in the 14th century by the Sharqi dynasty, the fort features grand gateways, arched entrances, and a mosque within its complex. The architecture showcases a unique blend of Islamic and regional styles, making it a captivating site for history and architecture enthusiasts. Visitors can stroll through the expansive courtyards and explore the remnants of this historic site. Its close proximity to Varanasi makes it a convenient and worthwhile addition to any travel itinerary.
Timings: 9 AM – 5 PM
Location: Jaunpur, around 60 km from Varanasi
Tip: Pair your visit with a stop at the Atala Mosque, another architectural marvel

6. Lal Khan’s Tomb And Fort Remnants
The historical ruins of Lal Khan’s Tomb, linked to the forts in Varanasi
Photo: Nandanupadhyay / Wikimedia Commons
Lal Khan’s Tomb, located near the Ganges, is nestled amidst the remnants of an old fort. Although the structure is modest, it carries significant historical value, reflecting the Mughal influence in the region. The serene surroundings and proximity to the river create a tranquil atmosphere, making it an excellent spot for those seeking peace and quiet. The area is also a favourite among bird watchers, thanks to the variety of bird species that frequent the region. Its blend of history and nature offers visitors a unique retreat away from the bustling city, perfect for a relaxing day out.
Timings: 8 AM – 5 PM
Location: Near Malviya Bridge, Varanasi
Tip: Visit early in the morning for a serene experience and to avoid crowds

7. Rajdari And Devdari Forts
A candid shot from one of the forts in Varanasi that are major attractions for travellers
Photo: Pexels / Pixabay / Image For Representation Only
Located near the Chandraprabha Wildlife Sanctuary, the Rajdari and Devdari forts offer a unique blend of history and nature. These forts are surrounded by dense forests and waterfalls, making them perfect for nature lovers. Although the structures are now in ruins, they provide an intriguing glimpse into the architectural styles of ancient forts in Varanasi’s vicinity. Visitors can explore the remnants while enjoying scenic treks along the sanctuary trails. These forts offer a peaceful escape from city life, making them ideal for those seeking adventure and history.
Timings: 8 AM – 6 PM
Location: Chandraprabha Wildlife Sanctuary, around 70 km from Varanasi
Tip: Carry snacks and water, as the area is remote with limited food options

8. Sikandra Fort
The entrance to Sikandra Fort, a hidden treasure among forts in Varanasi
Photo: Trivendra300 / Wikimedia Commons
Sikandra Fort lies on the outskirts of Varanasi and holds a unique place in history as a defensive outpost. Built during the reign of the Mughals, the fort displays elements of both Mughal and Indian architecture. Although parts of the fort are now in ruins, visitors can still explore the old courtyards and corridors that offer a glimpse of the past. The fort is surrounded by local markets, adding to its charm and offering a chance to experience rural life near Varanasi.
Timings: 9 AM – 5 PM
Location: Sikandara, about 30 km from Varanasi
Tip: Visit in the morning to explore both the fort and the nearby markets

9. Bhadohi Fort
Visitors enjoying a day trip at Bhadohi Fort make for a scenic holiday experience
Photo: sarangib / Pixabay / Image For Representation Only
Bhadohi Fort, situated in the neighbouring district of Varanasi, is a hidden gem waiting to be explored. Known for its towering walls and grand gateways, the fort offers a glimpse into the region’s lesser-known history. While it doesn’t attract heavy tourist crowds, it provides a peaceful retreat for those seeking an offbeat adventure. Surrounded by quaint villages, visitors have the opportunity to engage with the local community and experience rural life firsthand. During festivals, the fort comes alive as a cultural hub, with artisans showcasing traditional crafts, adding to the charm of this historic site.
Timings: 8 AM – 4 PM
Location: Bhadohi District, around 50 km from Varanasi
Tip: Plan a visit during local festivals to enjoy cultural events

10. Tilanga Fort
Visitors travel to forts in Varanasi to witness magnificent history at this majestic location
Photo: sarangib / Pixabay / Image For Representation Only
Tilanga Fort, nestled in the quiet countryside near Varanasi, is a lesser-explored treasure. The ruins of the fort are enveloped by lush greenery, offering visitors a tranquil environment to explore. Believed to have functioned as a watchtower, it provides panoramic views of the surrounding landscape, making it a favourite spot for photographers. History enthusiasts will also enjoy uncovering its past, despite its relatively low popularity. Tilanga Fort’s peaceful setting, away from the bustling city, makes it an excellent destination for those seeking solitude and an offbeat adventure amidst nature and history.
Timings: 8 AM – 5 PM
Location: Near Varanasi, accessible by road
Tip: Wear comfortable shoes for walking around the ruins

Varanasi’s forts are not mere remnants of the past—they are storytellers of a bygone era, each narrating tales of rulers, conquests, and cultural evolution. From the majestic Ramnagar Fort to the tranquil ruins of Tilanga, these forts offer more than just architectural beauty; they provide a window into the region’s rich history. Whether you’re a history buff or a traveller in search of offbeat experiences, these forts promise an enriching journey. Plan your trip here now with TripXL.


VARANASI MUSEUMS:-
1. Archaeological Museum Sarnath
Archaeological Museum, Sarnath

Archaeological Museum Sarnath was established in 1910. Claiming it to be the oldest museum of archaeological surveys in India won’t be wrong.

There are five galleries and two verandahs which display the archaics found in Sarnath between the 3rd century BC and the 12th century AD.

Price: Entry Fees – ₹5

The museum offers free entry for children below the age of 15 years. A guide facility is available.

Timing: 9 A.M. – 5 P.M., every day, except Friday. It remains closed on Fridays.

Location: Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Dhamek Stupa: An iconic Buddhist monument.
Mulagandha Kuti Vihara: An ancient Buddhist temple.
Chaukhandi Stupa: A historical Buddhist site.
Deer Park: Where Buddha gave his first sermon.
Ashoka Pillar: A famous monument erected by Emperor Ashoka.
2. Bharat Kala Bhavan
Bharat Kala Bhavan Museum, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi

Initially founded as Bharat Kala Parishad in 1920 at Godaulia, Bharat Kala Bhawan displays the history of India. The growth record of this museum is consistent.

More than 1 lakh objects in this museum are dedicated to archaeological antiques and art. Some of the objects which are kept on display here date back to the 1st-15th centuries.

Ticket Price: For Indians: ₹20 / For foreigners: ₹250

Timing: Mon-Sat: 10:30 A.M. – 4:30 P.M. It remains closed on Sunday.

Location: Banaras Hindu University Campus, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Banaras Hindu University (BHU): One of the largest residential universities in Asia.
New Vishwanath Temple: A replica of the Kashi Vishwanath temple inside BHU.
Alamgir Mosque: Overlooking the Ganges, this mosque offers a beautiful view.
Durga Temple: A popular temple dedicated to Goddess Durga.
Tulsi Manas Temple: Dedicated to Lord Rama, featuring beautiful gardens.
3. Ramnagar Fort Museum
Ramnagar Fort Museum, Varanasi

Established in 1917, Ramnagar Fort Museum is popularly known as Maharaja Banaras Vidya Mandir Trust Museum. The Ramnagar Fort in which this museum is made belongs to the 17th century. There are five galleries in this museum.

It begins with collecting old vehicles and palanquins and then is followed by the gallery of textiles. The Fort, along with the background of the setting sun, is a mesmerizing treat to the eyes. Moreover, there is a place dedicated to watching the sunset view over the river.

Timing: Mon-Sun: 10 A.M. – 5:30 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Ramnagar Fort, Near the Ganges River, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Ramnagar Fort: A historical fort offering panoramic views.
Shri Ram Rekha Mandir: A temple with a rich history.
Vyas Temple: An ancient temple dedicated to Sage Vyas.
Raja Ghat: A serene spot by the Ganges river.
Chet Singh Ghat: Historically significant and offers a picturesque view.
Explore Packages for Varanasi:
Varanasi Prayagraj Ayodhya Tour
14 Days Rajasthan and Varanasi Travel
Delhi Agra Jaipur Varanasi Trip
Golden Triangle With Varanasi Tour
3 Days Varanasi Temple Itinerary
Click More Itineraries for Varanasi
4. Government Museum
Established in 1874, The Government Museum has a good collection of antiquities from the 3rd century to the 12th century.

Clay objects, pottery, bronze items, terracotta bowls, and paintings are the main highlights of this museum. Moreover, one can find several archaeological remains excavated from the region of Mathura in this museum.

Timing – 9.30 A.M. to 6.00 P.M.

Closed on – Public holidays

There are no entry fees.

Location: Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Sarnath Archaeological Site: A must-visit site for history lovers.
Japanese Temple: A symbol of peace and harmony.
Sarnath Museum: Showcasing artifacts from the Buddhist era.
Thai Temple: Beautiful architecture representing Thai Buddhist tradition.
Chinese Temple: A serene temple with distinct Chinese architectural features.
5. Trade Facilitation Center and Craft Museum
Trade Facilitation Center and Craft Museum, Varanasi

This museum is one of the leading businesses in the Art Galleries. Other than being a museum, it also trades in art stuff.

It is pretty famous in the category of Art galleries in Varanasi. They get their customers and visitors not only from Varanasi but from the whole country.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 11:30 A.M. – 7:00 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Bajardiha, Near the Varanasi-Lucknow National Highway, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Banaras Silk Weaving Center: Experience the making of the world-renowned Banaras silk.
Assi Ghat: Popular for evening aartis and boat rides.
Kedar Ghat: Known for its picturesque beauty and the Kedareshwar temple.
Sankat Mochan Temple: Dedicated to Lord Hanuman.
Durga Kund: A scenic pond next to the Durga temple.
6. Ruchika Art Gallery
Ruchika Art Gallery, Varanasi

Tucked away in the vibrant lanes of Varanasi, Ruchika Art Gallery stands as an emblem of artistic brilliance. This sanctuary for art lovers boasts a diverse array of modern masterpieces, each echoing the soul and spirit of the locale.

By offering a stage for indigenous artists to shine, the gallery not only preserves the city’s rich artistic heritage but also beckons visitors to dive deep into Varanasi’s creative heartbeat.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 11:00 A.M. – 8:00 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Durgakund Road, Near Bank of India, Bhelupur, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Ghats of Varanasi: A stretch of steps leading to the Ganges river.
Dashashwamedh Ghat: Famous for the Ganga Aarti in the evening.
Kashi Vishwanath Temple: One of the most sacred temples in Hinduism.
Manikarnika Ghat: A significant cremation ghat.
Scindia Ghat: Offers a serene view of the river.
7. Kriti Gallery
Kriti Gallery, Varanasi

Kriti Gallery stands as a testament to Varanasi’s rich artistic heritage. The space is dedicated to promoting emerging artists and their innovative creations.

With exhibitions changing regularly, visitors get a glimpse into the diverse art forms, from traditional to abstract, reflecting the city’s dynamic spirit.

Timing: Mon to Fri:- 11:00 A.M. – 5:00 P.M.  It remains closed on Saturday and Sunday.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Mahmoorganj Road, Near Sigra, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Shivala Ghat: A peaceful spot by the Ganges.
Marnikanika Ghat: Historically significant.
Banaras Toy Museum: Showcasing traditional toys of the region.
Jantar Mantar: An ancient observatory.
Nepali Temple: Unique wooden architecture and carvings.
8. Man Singh Observatory
Man Singh Observatory, Varanasi

A masterpiece of design, the Man Singh Observatory stands as a glowing tribute to India’s age-old astronomical genius. Commissioned by the visionary Maharaja Man Singh, the observatory is home to an impressive array of celestial instruments, revealing the advanced scientific insights of its era.

Blending its distinctive architecture with a rich historical backdrop, this observatory is a magnet for those with a penchant for history and an ardor for the cosmos.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 9:00 A.M. – 5:00 P.M.

Ticket Price: For Indians: ₹20 / For foreigners: ₹250

Location: Man Mandir Ghat, Dashashwamedh, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Jantar Mantar: A historical astronomical observatory.
Chandra Prabha Wildlife Sanctuary: A short drive away, great for nature lovers.
Dashashwamedh Ghat: Vibrant surroundings and the evening aarti.
St. Mary’s Cathedral: A beautiful church with impressive architecture.
Gyan Vapi Mosque: A historical monument showcasing Mughal architecture.
9. Mehta Art Gallery
Mehta Art Gallery, Varanasi

Mehta Art Gallery radiates with an energy that weaves together hues and sentiments. A brainchild of the Mehta lineage, this gallery is a steadfast champion for both renowned and emerging talents in the art world.

Displaying an expansive spectrum of artistic expressions, from tranquil nature scenes to avant-garde abstractions, it invites visitors into a deeply engaging aesthetic journey.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 11:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Mahmoorganj Road, Near Sigra, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Hanuman Ghat: Peaceful and less crowded than other ghats.
Baba Black Sheep Boutique: For shopping enthusiasts.
Rana Mahal Ghat: Known for its intricate architecture.
Chousatti Ghat: Offers a serene view and is historically significant.
Kedar Ghat: Beautiful surroundings and an ancient temple.
10. Ganga Darpan Interpretation Centre
Ganga Darpan Interpretation Centre, Varanasi

Ganga Darpan is not just a museum; it’s a journey through the cultural, spiritual, and ecological significance of the revered Ganges River.

The center offers interactive exhibits and multimedia presentations, shedding light on the river’s role in India’s history and its current challenges. A visit here deepens one’s understanding and appreciation of this sacred waterway.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 10:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Assi Ghat, Near Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Ghats of Varanasi: Perfect for a boat ride or a walk.
Ganga Aarti: Witness the grandeur of the evening aarti.
Marnikanika Ghat: Historically and culturally significant.
Banaras Art Gallery: Showcasing local art.
Kashi Vishwanath Corridor: A newly developed stretch with gardens, temples, and eateries.
11. Lal Bahadur Shastri Family Home Museum
Lal Bahadur Shastri Family Home Museum, Varanasi

A tribute to India’s esteemed former Prime Minister, Lal Bahadur Shastri, this museum provides an intimate window into his life and illustrious legacy.

Located within the walls of his familial abode, it curates a rich collection of memorabilia, candid photographs, and cherished possessions, sketching a vivid image of a leader whose humility and principles profoundly shaped the nation’s ethos.

Timing: 10 A.M. – 5 P.M., every day, except Tuesday. It remains closed on Tuesday.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Ramnagar, Near the banks of the Ganges, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Kashi Vishwanath Temple: A major religious attraction.
Man Mandir Ghat: Historic observatories and a beautiful view.
Gyan Vapi Well: Historically significant.
Kaal Bhairav Temple: An ancient temple dedicated to the fierce form of Lord Shiva.
Ann Kuan: A historic well with legends.
12. Pratibha Art Gallery
Pratibha Art Gallery, Varanasi

Pratibha Art Gallery is a symphony of artistry and vision. This enclave showcases a kaleidoscope of creations, from classic depictions echoing India’s opulent past to avant-garde expressions aligning with today’s zeitgeist.

Emerging as a luminous landmark for aficionados of art, the gallery unfolds as a realm of inspiration and artistic discovery.

Timing: Mon to Sun:- 11:00 A.M. – 7:00 P.M.

There are no entry fees.

Location: Maldahiya, In front of the Vidyapeeth Gate, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

Nearby Attractions:

Bharat Mata Mandir: A unique temple dedicated to the Indian nation.
Sankat Mochan Temple: Peaceful surroundings and devoted to Lord Hanuman.
Durga Temple: Also known as the Monkey Temple.
Banaras Toy Museum: A delightful visit for kids and adults.
Tulsi Ghat: Named after the great poet Tulsidas, offers a serene view.



VARANASI PARKS:-
1. Ravidas Park
Ravidas Park is a popular destination for tourists and locals alike. It is a tranquil oasis of green surrounded by the bustling streets of the city, and has been a cherished spot in the hearts of Varanasi residents for generations. Visitors to the park can enjoy a number of activities, from taking a relaxing stroll around its lush grounds, to admiring its stunning historical monuments, to simply soaking up the peaceful atmosphere. Ravidas Park is a wonderful place to spend a few hours and a must-see for any traveler to Varanasi.
Park Details:
Address: Nagwa Rd, near Girls Primary School , Nagwa, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005
Timing: 8 am–9 pm
Rating: 4.1

2. Nehru Park
Nehru Park, located near the banks of the Ganges River in Varanasi, India, is a tranquil and peaceful oasis in the bustling city. This park is a popular spot for locals, tourists, and spiritual seekers alike to enjoy the beauty of nature and the serenity that it provides. With lush greenery, meandering pathways, and a large, sparkling lake, Nehru Park is the perfect place for relaxation, contemplation, and meditation. Whether you simply want to sit and savor the views or take a leisurely stroll around the grounds, Nehru Park offers something for everyone.
Park Details:
Address: 8XMG+VRH, Kennedy Rd, Varanasi cantonment, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221002
Timing: 5–9 am, 3–9 pm
Rating: 4.0

3. Anand Park
Anand Park, a popular recreational area located in the heart of Varanasi, is a great place to spend time with friends and family. There’s something for everyone to enjoy. The park offers a variety of activities like yoga and meditation, as well as a playground for children. With its lush green spaces, peaceful atmosphere, and stunning views of the city, Anand Park is a perfect spot for a day out or a weekend getaway.
Park Details:
Address: Bankati Hanuman Road, Durgakund Rd, near Vankatti Hanumanji Mandir, Durgakund, Anandbagh, Bhelupur, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221010
Timing: 4 am–10 pm
Rating: 4.1

4. Sarnath Deer Park
Sarnath Deer Park is a popular tourist destination known for its rich cultural and spiritual heritage. It is also home to a large population of spotted deer, which are a protected species. The park is spread in more than acres and is home to many ancient monuments, including the Dhamekh Stupa, which is said to be the oldest Buddhist monument in India. Visitors can also take a stroll through the park’s lush gardens and enjoy the peaceful atmosphere.
Park Details:
Address: 92JG+RJ9, Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221007
Timing: 10 am–5 pm
Rating: 4.1

5. Chaukhandi Stupa, Sarnath
The Chaukhandi Stupa is an ancient Buddhist monument located in the city of Sarnath, Uttar Pradesh, India. It was originally built during the reign of the Emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century B.C. and has since been restored to its former glory. The Stupa is the site where Gautama Buddha first taught the Dharma after his enlightenment. Its main feature is an ornate octagonal tower surmounted by a multi-tiered spire. The Stupa is surrounded by several smaller monuments, including a stone pillar commemorating the Buddha’s first sermon. Inside the Stupa.
Park Details:
Address: 92FF+JC4, Rishpattan Rd, Near, Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221007
Timing: 6 am–6 pm
Rating: 4.4

6. Company Garden
The Company Garden in Varanasi is an oasis of tranquility in the bustling city. With its lush green lawns, and vibrant flowers, it is a welcome respite from the hustle and bustle of everyday life.
Park Details:
Address: 8297+V89, Maidagin Xing, Daranagar, Kotwali, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221001
Timing: 5–10 am, 4–10 pm
Rating: 4.0

7. Shri Nagar Park
The beautiful Shri Nagar Park in Varanasi is a popular destination for locals and tourists alike. It is the perfect place to relax, take a leisurely stroll, or enjoy a picnic. Whether you have an hour or an entire day, the Shri Nagar Park in Varanasi is an ideal spot to experience the natural beauty of Varanasi.
Park Details:
Address: 8X5W+M6Q, Sonia Rd, near Ramkund talab, Shri Nagar Colony, Sidhgiribagh, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221010
Timing: 4 am–11 pm
Rating: 4.1

8. Shaheed Udyan
The beautiful Shaheed Udyan in the ancient city of Varanasi is a sight to behold. The park features a variety of sculptures and monuments from different eras, making it a great place to explore and learn about the city’s history. Visitors can also take a leisurely stroll or cycle through the park’s pathways, or enjoy a picnic in the sprawling lawns. There are also plenty of food stalls and refreshment options for those who wish to have a bite or two during their visit.
Park Details:
Address: 8X7P+3QJ, Chhittupura, Sigra, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221010
Timing: 4 am–9 pm
Rating: 4.2

9. Nagar Nigam Park
Nagar Nigam Park is a tranquil and pleasant spot to spend an afternoon. The lush green expanse of the park is surrounded by tall trees that provide a cool, shady refuge from the hot summer sun. Take a stroll along the paved pathways which wind around the park and take in the sights and sounds of nature, or relax on one of the many benches scattered throughout. Stop at the small cafe for a cold drink or snack before continuing your exploration of the park.
Park Details:
Address: D59/235-3-u, Lane Number 5, Nirala Nagar, Jai Prakash Nagar, Shivpurwa, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221010
Timing: Open 24 hours
Rating: 3.5

10. Machodari Park
Machodari Park - Parks in Varanasi
Machodari Park is a beautiful oasis in the midst of an urban landscape. The park features lush greenery, walking paths, and a peaceful atmosphere that is a welcome respite from the hustle and bustle of the city. Visitors to Machodari Park can spend their time enjoying the serenity of the park, walking through its harmonious gardens.
Park Details:
Address: Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221001
Timing: Open 24 hours
Rating: 3.5

11. Shivala Park
Shivala Park – Parks in Varanasi
The majestic Shivala Park is one of the most iconic landmarks in the entire region. It is a popular destination among locals and tourists alike. Here, visitors can take a peaceful stroll, admire the stunning architecture, or take part in spiritual activities such as prayer and meditation. The park is also home to some of the oldest temples in the area, making it a must-visit destination for those interested in the history of the city.
Park Details:
Address: 72W4+9R5, Ghats of Varanasi, Shivala, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221001
Timing: Open 24 hours
Rating: 4.4

12. Rose Garden
Rose Garden - Parks in Varanasi
The iconic Rose Garden of Varanasi is renowned for its breathtaking beauty and lush greenery, making it a popular destination for tourists and locals alike. With its fragrant air, vibrant colors, and peaceful atmosphere, the Rose Garden is the perfect place to relax, unwind, and experience the beauty of nature at its best.
Park Details:
Address: Sarkaripura, Manduwadih, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221103
Timing: 7 am–7 pm
Rating: 5

13. Saraswati Garden
Saraswati Garden – Parks in Varanasi
Saraswati Garden is a beautiful gardens which is feast for the eyes. Visitors to the garden can take a leisurely stroll among the many trees and flowers. There are also several monuments and temples located within the grounds of the garden, making it a great place to explore and learn about the fascinating history of Varanasi.
Park Details:
Address: 7XGV+XG4, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005
Timing: Open 24 hours
Rating: 4.4

14. Gandhi Park
Gandhi Park – Parks in Varanasi
Gandhi Park is an ideal destination for those looking to experience the renowned spiritual and historical significance of the area. With its sprawling gardens, lush greenery, and amazing atmosphere, the park offers the perfect spot for visitors to take a break from the hustle and bustle of the city and take a moment to reflect. Gandhi Park is the perfect place to relax and enjoy the serenity of Varanasi.
Park Details:
Address: Nirala Nagar, Chhittupura, Shivpurwa, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221010
Timing:  Open 24 hours
Rating: 3.6

15. Rajnarayan Smarak Park
Rajnarayan Smarak Park - Parks in Varanasi
Rajnarayan is a beautiful and tranquil oasis that has been carefully designed to honor Rajnarayan, a renowned leader and social worker in the area. It is home to a range of lush gardens, winding pathways, and tranquil lagoons, making it the perfect place to spend a leisurely afternoon with friends and family. Visitors to the park can explore a wide variety of plants. In addition to its natural beauty, the park also houses several monuments and memorials related to Rajnarayan’s life and legacy, making it a fascinating and educational experience for visitors of all ages.
Park Details:
Address: 8273+PJ3, Lahurabir Rd, Benia Bagh, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221001
Timing: 4 am–10 pm 
Rating: 4.1

16. Hari Nagar Park
Hari Nagar Park - Parks in Varanasi
The scenic Hari Nagar Park is an ideal place to spend a day with family and friends. With lush greenery and sprawling lawns, the park is a great spot to catch up with nature and take a break from the hustle and bustle of city life. Enjoy a leisurely stroll along the pathways, admire the beautiful variety of flowers, and relax on one of the many benches.There’s something for everyone here at Hari Nagar Park in Varanasi.
Park Details:
Address: Ghanti Mill Road, Hari Nagar Colony, Shivpurwa, Varanasi – 221002
Timing: 8am – 9pm
Rating: 3.8

17. Rajarshi Garden
Rajarshi Garden – Parks in Varanasi
Rajarshi Garden is a popular destination for tourists and locals alike. Rajarshi Garden is a peaceful and picturesque place to relax and take in the beauty of Varanasi. With a variety of trees and plants, it is a perfect spot for a leisurely stroll, to admire the vibrant colors and fragrances of the garden.
Park Details:
Address: 9X3F+H63, Laxmanpur, Narayanpur, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221003
Timing:  5 am–8 pm
Rating: 4.3



FAQs about Varanasi Museums:
1. What are the operating hours of the museums in Varanasi?
Answer: Typically, Varanasi’s museums welcome visitors from 10:00 AM to 5:00 PM. Nevertheless, operational hours can shift due to special events or public holidays. For the most precise timings, it’s wise to consult the respective museum’s official website or get in touch with them directly.

2. Is there an entry fee for the museums?
Answer: Indeed, the majority of Varanasi’s museums have an admission fee, and the cost often fluctuates based on the museum and visitor category, such as adult, child, or student. Several establishments provide concessions for students, the elderly, and group visits. To ascertain specific prices, it’s best to refer to the museum’s primary website or seek information at its entrance.

3. Are the museums in Varanasi accessible to people with disabilities?
Answer: A significant number of Varanasi’s museums have prioritized inclusivity, equipping their premises with features like ramps, wheelchair amenities, and disability-friendly restrooms. However, given the antiquated architecture of some establishments, certain sections may pose accessibility challenges. For personalized assistance or specific queries, reaching out to the museum beforehand is a prudent step.

4. Can I take photos inside the museums?
Answer: Photography policies vary across museums. While some museums allow non-flash photography, others might restrict photography entirely or charge an additional fee for it. Always look for signs indicating the museum’s photography policy or ask the staff before taking pictures.

5. How much time should I allocate for a visit to a museum in Varanasi?
Answer: Your duration at a museum in Varanasi often aligns with your personal interests. Typically, guests allocate between 1 to 3 hours for a museum visit. However, for larger or more detailed exhibitions, you might want to allocate half a day. Always check if there are guided tours available, as they can provide deeper insights into the exhibits.